ILLM-TSC: INTEGRATION REINFORCEMENT LEARNING AND
LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL FOR TRAFFIC SIGNAL CONTROL
POLICY IMPROVEMENT
A PREPRINT
Aoyu Pang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
aoyupang@link.cuhk.edu.cn
Maonan Wang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China
maonanwang@link.cuhk.edu.cn
Man-On Pun
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
simonpun@cuhk.edu.cn
Chung Shue Chen
Nokia Bell Labs, Paris, France
chung shue.chen@nokia-bell-labs.com
Xi Xiong
Tongji University, Shanghai, China
xi xiong@tongji.edu.cn
July 9, 2024
ABSTRACT
Urban congestion remains a critical challenge, with traffic signal control (TSC) emerging as a po-
tent solution. TSC is often modeled as a Markov Decision Process problem and then solved using
reinforcement learning (RL), which has proven effective. However, the existing RL-based TSC
system often overlooks imperfect observations caused by degraded communication, such as packet
loss, delays, and noise, as well as rare real-life events not included in the reward function, such as
unconsidered emergency vehicles. To address these limitations, we introduce a novel integration
framework that combines a large language model (LLM) with RL. This framework is designed to
manage overlooked elements in the reward function and gaps in state information, thereby enhanc-
ing the policies of RL agents. In our approach, RL initially makes decisions based on observed
data. Subsequently, LLMs evaluate these decisions to verify their reasonableness. If a decision is
found to be unreasonable, it is adjusted accordingly. Additionally, this integration approach can be
seamlessly integrated with existing RL-based TSC systems without necessitating modifications. Ex-
tensive testing confirms that our approach reduces the average waiting time by 17.5% in degraded
communication conditions as compared to traditional RL methods, underscoring its potential to ad-
vance practical RL applications in intelligent transportation systems. The related code can be found
at https://github.com/Traffic-Alpha/iLLM-TSC.
Keywords Traffic Signal Control, Policy Improvement, Large Language Model, Reinforcement Learning, Prompt
Engineering,
arXiv:2407.06025v1  [cs.AI]  8 Jul 2024
iLLM-TSC
A PREPRINT
Degraded
Communication 
ƽǘ
ƫǘ+Ǡ
RSU
TSC 
Agent
Observation
Emergency  vehicle
Long-tail Events
Packet delay, Missing ....
Figure 1: Challenges in real-world TSC systems: Degraded communication and long-tail scenarios impacting RL
decision-making.
1
Introduction
Traffic congestion has become a critical issue in urban governance. The increasing number of vehicles in urban areas
significantly impacts travel efficiency, increases traffic accidents, and exacerbates environmental pollution. Advances
in electronics and computer technology have paved the way for intelligent transportation systems, which aim to en-
hance transportation efficiency through optimized control and scheduling decisions. Intelligent traffic signal control
(TSC) systems, in particular, offer a viable solution to address these efficiency and safety-related challenges [1]. Tra-
ditional TSC schemes, such as the Webster method [2] and SCATS [3], provide foundational approaches to TSC
system design. However, these methods are heavily reliant on predetermined parameter settings and struggle to adapt
dynamically to fluctuations in traffic flow [4].
To address the limitations of traditional TSC methods, recent research has employed reinforcement learning (RL) to
utilize real-time sensor data at intersections for decision-making [5]. RL is capable of learning from data and dy-
namically adjusting control strategies to accommodate real-time variations in traffic, showing impressive performance
in both single-intersection and multi-intersection scenarios. The effectiveness of RL has been confirmed in large-
scale implementations. However, most existing studies that apply RL in TSC operate under the assumption of perfect
observation conditions and absence of communication issues, which are not reflective of real-world scenarios. For
instance, as shown in Fig. 1, the communication process among vehicles, roadside units (RSUs), and base stations
can face problems such as packet delays, losses, and noise. These issues can significantly degrade the performance
of RL models [6]. When dealing with degraded communication scenarios, RL-based methods may make erroneous
decisions, potentially jeopardizing traffic safety [7,8]. Moreover, very few works consider long-tail scenarios, such as
those involving emergency vehicles [9]. These challenges undermine the reliability of RL-based methods in practical
applications, presenting substantial obstacles to the real-world deployment of RL-based TSC.
Recognizing the limitations of both traditional methods and RL alone, researchers have begun to explore alternative
solutions that leverage new technological paradigms. Large Language Models (LLMs) are considered prototypes
of General Artificial Intelligence (GAI) and are seen as potential solutions for addressing the adaptability issues of
TSC algorithms to dynamic environments [10]. Some efforts have begun exploring the application of LLMs in TSC.
For example, [11] proposed a framework that utilizes LLMs to optimize urban TSC, overcoming the limitations of
traditional methods in coping with rapidly changing traffic environments. Similarly, [12] developed a model called
LA-Light, providing agents with various tools to address complex TSC challenges in the real world. However, despite
LLMs’ excellent performance in solving decision problems by enhancing the model’s generalization ability, their
performance remains suboptimal for specific problems, as they do not learn environment-specific policies [13]. In
contrast, RL models can effectively learn policies directly from environment-specific traffic data. Thus motivated, this
work aims to leverage the synergy of RL and LLM to achieve better performance.
2
iLLM-TSC
A PREPRINT
To enhance the generalization ability of TSC systems to environmental changes while effectively handling various
emergencies such as packet loss or the presence of emergency vehicles, this paper introduces a novel method of
integration RL and an LLM named iLLM-TSC. Specifically, the iLLM-TSC framework employs RL agents to make
initial decisions based on observed data, leveraging their ability to learn from specific environments. Subsequently,
the LLM model refines these decisions by incorporating additional real-time information not initially used by the RL
agents, such as the presence of emergency vehicles in the environment. This integration of LLM with RL enhances
the system’s responsiveness and adaptability, allowing the TSC system to maintain high efficiency under standard
conditions and demonstrating increased robustness in long-tailed or degraded communication scenarios. The main
contributions of this study are summarized as follows:
• We model the TSC problem in the real world as an MDP that includes unconsidered elements in the reward function
and missing state information. This design considers real-world issues such as communication degradation (e.g.,
packet loss) and emergency vehicles. We provide a hybrid framework that can be seamlessly integrated with existing
RL-based TSC systems without requiring modifications.
• We introduce a novel hybrid framework, iLLM-TSC, which integrates RL with LLMs to enhance TSC. This frame-
work employs a dual-step decision-making process where RL agents initially make decisions based on direct obser-
vations, and then LLM agents evaluate these decisions considering the broader environmental context.
• Extensive experiments and tests validate the effectiveness of the proposed iLLM-TSC framework. In scenarios
with degraded communication, iLLM-TSC reduces the average waiting time by 17.5% compared to traditional
RL methods. This significant improvement underscores the enhanced scene comprehension capabilities of LLMs,
tailored specifically for TSC applications.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a review of the relevant literature. Next, we will
define transportation terms relevant to the discussion and the problem to be addressed in Section 3. The core of our
proposed methodology, including the RL module and the LLM module, is detailed in Section 4. Section 5 describes the
experimental framework, outlines the benchmark methods, and evaluates the performance of our proposed framework
against these benchmarks. Finally, Section 6 concludes our findings and offers insights into potential avenues for
future research in this domain.
2
Related Works
2.1
Traffic Signal Control Methods
Efficient TSC strategies are crucial for reducing urban congestion. Most of the traditional TSC methods optimize
traffic signals based on simplistic assumptions or fixed rules. For instance, the Webster method [2] calculates the
ideal cycle length and allocation of traffic signal phases at intersections based on traffic volume and the assumption of
traffic flow stability over specific periods. In addition, Self-Organizing Traffic Light Control (SOTL) [14] uses a set of
predetermined rules to decide whether to continue with the current traffic signal phase or initiate a phase change.
While traditional TSC systems have achieved some success in mitigating traffic congestion, their effectiveness is
constrained by their dependence on real-time traffic data and their limited adaptability to quickly changing traffic
conditions in complex environments. RL-based TSC methods are receiving increasing attention for their dynamic
management of traffic signals [15]. These RL systems typically use factors such as queue length [8, 16, 17], vehicle
waiting time [18,19], or intersection pressure [20] as key indicators in their reward functions to reduce traffic conges-
tion. Additionally, the frequency of signal switching has been considered [21, 22] to prevent the negative impacts of
rapid signal changes, such as increased stop-and-go driving and the risk of accidents. While RL-based TSC systems
provide flexibility in optimizing traffic flow through adjustments to reward functions, finding the right balance among
these factors is still a challenging task. Furthermore, a reward function that fails to account for infrequent yet crucial
events may not provide agents with the necessary guidance to manage unforeseen circumstances adeptly [23].
2.2
Large Language Model Applications
As LLMs gain recognition across multiple domains [24], there have been several successful applications in the field
of intelligent transportation recently [11,12,25–27]. [12] proposed a TSC method based on the LLM-Assisted frame-
work, integrating LLMs into TSC by placing them at the center of the decision-making process and combining them
with perception and decision-making tools to control traffic signals. Furthermore, [25] introduced LLMLight, a novel
framework that uses LLMs as decision-making agents for TSC. By leveraging the advanced generalization capabilities
of LLMs, this framework facilitates a reasoning and decision-making process similar to human intuition, thus improv-
ing traffic control effectiveness. However, LLMs have not been trained specifically for these corresponding tasks,
3
iLLM-TSC
A PREPRINT
leading to shortcomings in decision-making for complex traffic issues [28]. This results in a performance disparity
between TSC models managed by LLMs and those managed by RL. While RL agents are effective, they often fail to
adapt to new and unseen environments, which restricts their applications in dynamic real-world conditions [29]. Com-
bining RL with LLMs is expected to potentially compensate for their respective shortcomings and improve overall
performance.
Therefore, the integration of LLMs with RL to enhance the model’s capabilities is increasingly attracting attention [30–
32]. [33] uses LLMs to assist in designing reward functions for RL, helping RL agents better adapt to real-world
environments. Additionally, LLMs have significant potential in assisting RL agents in decision-making, leveraging
their abundance of pre-trained global knowledge and powerful modeling capabilities [29, 34]. Although there have
been many studies combining RL and LLM, they have not yet been applied to TSC. Therefore, we hope to integrate
LLM and RL for TSC, ensuring efficiency in normal scenarios while enabling the proposed framework to adapt to
complex real-world situations.
2.3
Prompt Engineering
Currently, LLMs often rely on superficial statistical patterns rather than systematic reasoning, which can degrade their
performance when faced with simple prompts [35]. To address this limitation, prompt engineering has emerged as
a crucial technique for enhancing the functionality of LLMs. It helps these models organize their responses more
logically, resulting in improved answer quality [36, 37]. This approach involves using task-specific prompts to boost
model effectiveness without modifying the core model parameters [38].
Prompt engineering utilizes carefully crafted instructions, enabling LLMs to perform effectively across a variety of
tasks and domains [39]. This adaptability is a significant departure from traditional methods, which typically re-
quire model retraining or substantial fine-tuning to tailor performance to specific tasks. The importance of prompt
engineering is underscored by its ability to direct model responses, thereby enhancing the adaptability and practical
applicability of LLMs.
Recent studies have been continuously exploring innovative approaches and applications of prompt engineering within
LLMs [37,40–42]. [42] introduce the Tree of Thoughts (ToT), which uses chain prompts to encourage the exploration
of ideas as an intermediate step in using LLMs to solve general problems. Furthermore, [40] proposes a prompt
refinement grading framework that enhances LLM capabilities through more detailed instructions and objectives.
In addition, [43] presents a Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) architecture, combining information retrieval
components with seq2seq generators, which can better handle knowledge-intensive tasks. Faced with scenarios like
TSC with strong rule constraints, we combine these works to design a set of prompts to exploit LLM performance
better, prevent LLM hallucinations, and improve overall framework performance.
3
Preliminaries and Problem Formulation
3.1
Traffic Movements and Phases
Movement: A standard four-legged road intersection comprises four entrances: East (E), West (W), North (N), and
South (S). Traffic movement refers to vehicles transitioning from an incoming approach to an outgoing one. As
depicted in Fig. 2, this intersection has four entrances, labeled E0, E1, E2, and E3. Each entrance facilitates two
movements: turning left (l) and proceeding straight (s). For instance, E0 l denotes a vehicle originating from E0
and intending to turn left. This study omits right turns, premised on the assumption that right turns are perpetually
permissible in jurisdictions adhering to left-hand traffic regulations. As a result, there are eight possible movements at
the intersection, referred to as m1, m2, m3, m4, m5, m6, m7, and m8 in the subsequent sections, and mi ∈M.
Phase: A phase represents a set of movements that can be executed concurrently without causing conflicts. Given the
consideration of only green and red signals, a phase can be conceptualized as a collection of permitted movements,
with all others being prohibited. Fig. 2 illustrates the four phases of a standard four-way intersection, denoted as
P = {0, 1, 2, 3}. For example, Phase-1 allows movements E0 s and E1 s to occur simultaneously.
Time and Time Slot: An RL agent takes an action to choose the next phase every time slot of τ seconds. Unless
specified otherwise, we set τ = 5 in the sequel.
3.2
TSC as an MDP Problem
An RL agent learns to make decisions through interactions with an environment modeled as a Markov Decision
Process (MDP) [44], defined by the tuple (S, A, P, R, γ). In the context of TSC, S represents the set of states, which
4
iLLM-TSC
A PREPRINT
E0
E1
E2
E3
(a) Phase-0
E0
E1
E2
E3
(b) Phase-1
E0
E1
E2
E3
(c) Phase-2
E0
E1
E2
E3
(d) Phase-3
Figure 2: Illustration of the four phases of traffic signals in a standard 4-way intersection considered in this work.
encapsulates both static and dynamic aspects of the intersection. A denotes the set of possible actions that adjust the
traffic signals. P defines the transition probabilities between states, R is the reward function, typically the negative
average waiting time of vehicles, and γ ∈(0, 1) is the discount factor. At time t, the agent’s strategy, given state
st ∈S and action a ∈A, is defined by the policy π : S →A such that π(st) = at. The objective is to develop
an agent for TSC with an optimal policy π∗that determines the best action a based on dynamic traffic conditions to
maximize the cumulative reward:
π∗(s) = arg max
a
E
" ∞
X
t=0
γtrt | s0 = s, a0 = a
#
,
(1)
where rt represents the reward given the current state st and the action taken at. Details of the RL model are discussed
in Section 4. This study focuses on the MDP model under two practical scenarios: (1) Imperfect state acquisition,
referred to as the degraded communication scenario, and (2) Situations unaccounted for by R, such as emergency
vehicles or accidents, referred to as the long-tail events.
In real-world applications, an agent interacts with the environment through some communication channel. Since
the communication channel is often imperfect, observations can be affected by noise and may even be lost during
transmission [7]. The mathematical model for the data transmitted under degraded communication conditions is
expressed as:
fdegraded(x) =
x + β · η
with probability (1 −p)
0
with probability p
,
(2)
where x represents the original data being transmitted. Here, p denotes the packet loss rate, which reflects the proba-
bility that a data packet is completely lost during transmission due to factors such as limited bandwidth or interference
among vehicles [45]. The variable η ∼N(0, 1) represents the noise, introducing random errors that can lead to incor-
rect interpretations of traffic conditions [46]. The parameter β is a scaling factor for the noise. Observations during the
training process of the agent are generally perfect, thus π(fdegraded(st)) may have difficulty providing an appropriate
at, and it may even harm normal TSC.
5
iLLM-TSC
A PREPRINT
Another issue is that real-world scenarios are complex, and many situations are often neglected in designing R for
TSC systems. An example is the arrival of an emergency vehicle such as an ambulance at an intersection, as illus-
trated in Fig. 1. In this situation, the primary objective shifts from maximizing intersection efficiency to enabling the
emergency vehicle to pass through as swiftly as possible. These rare but critical scenarios are difficult to account for
comprehensively in the design of R.
Therefore, this study aims to leverage the generalization and logical reasoning capabilities of LLMs to develop more
resilient TSC systems. We propose a policy improvement method designed to handle both unconsidered elements
in the reward function and missing state information. This approach enhances our method’s suitability for scenarios
characterized by degraded communication and long-tail events, ensuring that the system can maintain both efficiency
and safety under a broader range of real-world conditions.
Final Action 
& Explanation
Observation
Environment
Initial 
Action
Action Generation
RL Agent
Observation
Action
Refinement
TSC Assessment
Policy 
Network
. . .
Value 
Network
Action
 Essential hints + 
Data + Logical Chain 
Extract action
Encoder traffic 
observation into 
natural languag
Data
Answer
Figure 3: The detailed structure of the proposed iLLM-TSC system.
4
Methodology
As illustrated in Fig. 3, we introduce a framework called iLLM-TSC that combines LLM and an RL agent for TSC.
This framework initially employs an RL agent to make decisions based on environmental observations and policies
learned from the environment, thereby providing preliminary actions. Subsequently, an LLM agent refines these
actions by considering real-world situations and leveraging its understanding of complex environments. This approach
enhances the TSC system’s adaptability to real-world conditions and improves the overall stability of the framework.
Details regarding the RL agent and LLM agent components are provided in the following sections.
4.1
RL Agent Design
In the proposed method, the RL agent plays a pivotal role in making informed TSC decisions. This section outlines
the three essential components that constitute the RL agent: state, action, and reward. Each component is critical
for the agent’s operation within the TSC environment, influencing its decision-making process in real-time traffic
management.
State: The following five state variables (SVs) are defined to characterize each movement mi for i = 1, 2, · · · , 8.
1. Flow Speed (SV1): The average speed of vehicles in the movement, or -1 if there are no vehicles in the movement;
2. Mean Occupancy (SV2): This is the ratio between the total length of roads occupied by vehicles and the total length
of lanes, averaged over one-time slot;
3. Jam length meters (SV3): This variable captures the total length of traffic jams in meters for each movement;
4. Jam length vehicles (SV4): This variable captures the total length of traffic jams in terms of the number of vehicles;
5. Current Phase (SV5): A binary variable, indicating whether the movement is passable at the time of current
observation or not.
6
iLLM-TSC
A PREPRINT
In our study,
the state of each movement mi
at time t is then represented by the vector Si
t
=

SV i
1 (t), SV i
2 (t), . . . , SV i
5 (t)

for i = 1, 2, . . . , 8. Each element of this vector captures specific traffic data relevant to
the movement mi at the intersection.
After transmission, the state information for each movement is subjected to communication degradation, modeled
as ¯Si
t = fdegraded(Si
t). This transformation simulates the effects of packet loss and noise on the transmitted data, as
discussed earlier. Consequently, the collective state for all movements at time t, considering degraded communication
scenarios, is given by:
st =
 ¯S1
t , ¯S2
t , · · · , ¯S8
t
T ,
(3)
where st ∈R8×5 and (·)T is the transpose operator.
Action: Upon the conclusion of a given time slot, the RL agent executes an action at ∈P , selecting a phase from all
the array of available phases for the forthcoming time slot.
Reward: The objective of the RL agent is to minimize the waiting time of vehicles. In this work, the average waiting
time of vehicles is employed as the reward.
4.2
Training RL Agent for Initial TSC Decisions
The training of the RL-based agent is a critical aspect of the proposed framework. In this study, the Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) algorithm [47] is employed to train the RL agent. PPO is chosen due to its suitability for policy-
based reinforcement learning in environments with both discrete and continuous action spaces. This study utilizes two
primary neural networks, namely a policy network denoted as πθ and a value network denoted as vϕ, where θ and ϕ
are the respective network parameters. The policy network generates a probability distribution over the actions, given
the current state, while the value network estimates the expected future return for that state. The traffic intersection
observations st are used as input for both networks, generating πθ(st) and vϕ(st). Next, the following PPO objective
is proposed by taking into account both a policy loss Lp(θ) and a value function loss Lv(ϕ):
F(θ, ϕ) = −Lp(θ) + λLv(ϕ),
(4)
where λ is a hyperparameter that balances the two loss terms. Furthermore, the policy loss function Lp(θ) is defined
as:
Lp(θ) = ˆEπ
h
min

J(θ) ˆAt, clip (J(θ), 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆAt
i
,
(5)
where ˆEπ denotes the empirical expectation under policy πθ while ϵ represents the clipping range. Furthermore, J(θ)
and ˆAt take the following form:
J(θ)
=
πθ(at|st)
π˜θ(at|st),
(6)
ˆAt
=
rt+1 + γvϕ(st+1) −vϕ(st),
(7)
where γ is the discount factor that determines the present value of future rewards. πθ(·|·) and π˜θ(·|·) stand for the
current and previous policy, respectively. The previous policy π˜θ(·|·) is used as a reference to ensure that the policy
updates are consistent with the previous policy.
Finally, the value function Lv(ϕ) is computed as the mean-squared error between the predicted state values vϕ(s) and
the actual discounted returns:
Lv(ϕ) = ˆEπ

ˆAt
2
.
(8)
By minimizing this loss, the agent learns to predict the expected return from each state more accurately, which in turn
helps the agent to choose better actions.
4.3
Encoding Traffic Scenario into Text
As previously discussed, implementing RL-based TSC systems in real-world environments presents challenges, pri-
marily due to the systems’ limited understanding of the environment, which is crucial for effective decision-making.
Conversely, LLMs can enhance decision-making by interpreting the current traffic conditions at intersections through
natural language.
7
iLLM-TSC
A PREPRINT
Role to be played: TSC Assessment
Essential hints for decision-making:
1. You must output a decision when you finish this task. 
2. Your final output decision must be unique and not 
ambiguous.
3. You need to know your available actions and junction state 
before you make any decision.
4. Emergency vehicles have priority through intersections.
5. [...]
Logical chain of answers:
1. Decision:Traffic light decision-making  judgment  whether 
the Action is reasonable in the current state.
2. Explalanation: Your explanation about your decision, 
described your suggestions to the Crossing Guard. The 
analysis should be as detailed as possible, including the 
possible benefits of each action.
3. Final Action: ONLY the number of Action you suggestion, 
0, 1, 2 or 3
Traffic scenario description:
Static 
1.  Phase to Movement
2.  Action space  and their corresponding phases
Dynamic
1.  RL Agent Action
2.  Mean occupancy of each movement
3.  Number of cars waiting in each movement 
4.  Movements exist emergency vehicles
Answer Format:
Format the output as JSON with the following keys: 
```json
{
    "decision": string  // Judgment whether the RL Agent's ....
    "expalanations": string  // Your explaination about ...
    "final_action": string  // ONLY the number ...
}
Figure 4: The schematic diagram of LLM as a traffic assistant, illustrates the three-stage architecture of LLM in traffic
control: formulating thought programs, acquiring environmental information, and optimizing RL actions.
However, LLMs generally require inputs in natural language, which means the intersection information matrix st
cannot be used directly. It is therefore essential to translate the traffic scenario into a comprehensible natural language
description. Fig. 4 illustrates the structured prompt in natural language, which consists of five parts: the role of
the LLM, essential hints for decision-making, a description of the traffic scenario, the logical chain to guide LLM
reasoning, and the desired answer format.
The first part of the prompt explicitly defines the role of the LLM to ensure it understands its function in the scenario.
In this context, the LLM acts as a virtual tsc assessment, guiding its decision-making process. The second part provides
contextual information, including traffic rules and decision-making logic, which assists the LLM in making informed
decisions.
8
iLLM-TSC
A PREPRINT
The third part, the traffic scenario description, is the most crucial. Here, the scenario is translated into a text description
that the LLM can interpret. This description encompasses both static and dynamic information: static information
covers intersection topology and traffic phase information, while dynamic information includes real-time data such as
lane occupancy and average speed, along with the proposed RL action at = πθ(st).
The fourth part, the logic chain, assists the LLM in reasoning. It begins by analyzing the reasonableness of the RL
decision, followed by providing explanations, and concludes with a recommended decision based on this analysis.
The final part of the prompt specifies the output format for the LLM, instructing it to provide responses in a specific
JSON format. This structured output facilitates the use of regular expressions to extract results for automatic analysis.
This structured approach not only ensures that the LLM can interpret and analyze the traffic scenario effectively but
also aligns with the requirements for integrating these insights into practical traffic management systems.
4.4
Enhancing RL Decisions with LLM Feedback
After the traffic scene is translated into a natural language description, the LLMs can be employed to refine the
decisions made by the RL agent. This process begins by inputting prompt Ωinto the LLM model PLLM. The LLM
aims to maximize the probability of generating the optimal sequence of actions as described by Eq. (9), producing
each character sequentially.
p(Ot | Ω) =
|Ot|
Y
i=1
pLLM(oi | Ω, o<i),
(9)
where oi represents the i-th token, and Ot indicates the total number of tokens in the final response. The term o<i
denotes all tokens preceding the i-th token. To ensure the LLM outputs are in the required format, we utilize regular
expressions to extract the decision from Ot. However, as the LLM output may not always conform to the expected
format, a maximum of K attempts is allowed. If the system exceeds K attempts without obtaining a correctly format-
ted response, the original RL decision is executed. Algorithm 1 details the combined RL and LLM decision-making
process in iLLM-TSC.
According to Algorithm 1, the iLLM-TSC framework synergizes the strengths of RL and LLM to enhance the decision-
making process in TSC systems. The LLM contributes its advanced capabilities in logical reasoning to analyze the
actions proposed by the RL agent, thereby increasing the reliability of the system. Should there be a discrepancy
between the RL suggestion and the LLM’s logical framework, the LLM intervenes to adjust the action, ensuring the
stability and robustness of the traffic management system. This collaborative approach not only leverages the policy
power of RL but also utilizes the contextual understanding of LLM to optimize traffic control decisions effectively.
Algorithm 1 iLLM-TSC Inference Process
1: Initialize environment and load RL model;
2: Define K as the maximum number of attempts to refine the RL decision with LLM feedback;
3: for each timestep t do
4:
Observe state st from the TSC environment;
5:
Get action at = πθ(st) from RL agent;
6:
for i ←1 to K do
7:
Convert state st to natural language prompt Ω;
8:
Get output Ot from LLM model PLLM using Ω;
9:
Attempt to extract action using regex on Ot;
10:
if action is successfully extracted then
11:
at ←extracted action;
12:
break;
13:
end if
14:
end for
15:
Apply action at to the environment;
16:
Observe next state st+1;
17: end for
9
iLLM-TSC
A PREPRINT
Table 1: Comparison of model performance under normal or degraded communication scenario
Model
Normal Vehicles
Emergency Vehicles
Mean Travel Time
Mean Waiting Time
Mean Speed
Mean Travel Time
Mean Waiting Time
Mean Speed
Normal Scenarios
Fix duration
89.0
22.6
8.4
106.5
40.5
6.7
SOTL
88.3
19.8
8.4
85.5
21.0
8.2
ADLight
88.0
18.6
8.5
90.5
17.0
7.9
EMVLight
84.8
17.4
8.8
76.0
10.0
9.3
SARL-TSC
79.5
14.3
9.2
97.5
31.0
7.3
iLLM-TSC
86.5
16.4
8.7
80.5
11.5
8.5
Degraded Communication Scenario
SOTL
89.4
21.3
8.3
97.5
23.8
7.8
ADLight
89.1
20.6
8.5
96.5
22.0
7.8
EMVLight
89.5
21.1
8.5
93.7
13.0
8.0
SARL-TSC
83.6
18.8
8.5
116.0
36.0
7.7
iLLM-TSC
88.3
17.0
8.5
92.0
9.5
8.1
5
Experiment and Analysis
5.1
Experimental Setting
Extensive experiments were conducted on the Simulation of Urban MObility (SUMO) platform. We simulated an
intersection with the phase structure shown in Fig. 2, where a green light was followed by a yellow light for 3 seconds
before changing to a red light. Extension to more intersection types and more complex light phasing can be performed
straightforwardly. The duration of each time slot τ is set to 5 seconds. The LLM used in the following experiment was
GPT-4 recently released by OpenAI. The RL parameters were configured as follows: the discount factor γ was set to
0.99, the trace-decay parameter λ was set to 0.9, and the policy clipping range ϵ was established at 0.2. Additionally, we
simulated a packet loss rate p of 0.2 and introduced a scaling factor for noise β of 0.1 to mimic realistic communication
conditions. Furthermore, to evaluate the robustness and adaptability of the RL model when integrated with LLM
feedback, we set the maximum number of attempts to refine the RL decision based on LLM feedback at K = 3.
5.2
Compared Methods
Our evaluation encompasses five benchmark methods: two traditional TSC methods and three RL-based algorithms,
detailed as follows:
1. Fixed duration control: Fixed duration signal control algorithm is the most traditional method of TSC by pre-setting
the traffic signal’s phase sequence, phase duration, and cycle time in advance. In our experiment the fixed duration
is set 25s;
2. SOTL model [14]: SOTL algorithms utilize straightforward rules and indirect communication to enable traffic
lights to organize and adjust to dynamic traffic conditions autonomously, leading to a reduction in waiting times.
3. ADLight [18]: ADLight is a method for controlling traffic signal lights based on the PPO strategy in RL. Integrating
features of movement and action with the set current phase duration ensures uniformity in model structure across
different intersections.
4. EMVLight [9]: EMVLight is an RL framework that considers emergency vehicles (EMV) in TSC. This framework
addresses the coupling issue between EMV navigation and TSC. EMVLight not only reduces the travel time of
background vehicles but also shortens the waiting time of EMVs.
5. SARL-TSC [16]: SARL-TSC proposes a two-stage framework and leverages temporal information to enhance the
robustness of the RL model against observation-impaired. The feature extraction model utilized in this framework
is the EAttention.
5.3
Evaluation Metrics
We leverage mean travel time, mean waiting time, and mean speed of vehicles to evaluate the performance of different
actions made by TSC agents.
1. Mean travel time: The mean travel time quantifies the average duration of all the vehicles traveling from their
origins to their destinations.
10
iLLM-TSC
A PREPRINT
2. Mean waiting time: The mean waiting time quantifies the average queuing time of vehicles at every intersection in
the road network.
3. Mean speed: The mean speed quantifies the average speed of vehicles traveling from their origins to their respective
destinations.
5.4
Comparative Performance Analysis
Table 1 provides a performance comparison between iLLM-TSC and baseline algorithms under both normal and
degraded communication scenarios. Under normal circumstances, iLLM-TSC ensures rapid passage for emergency
vehicles while sustaining efficiency for conventional vehicles. Specifically, iLLM-TSC enhances the average travel
time, average waiting time, and mean speed for all vehicles by 2%, 11.9%, and 3%, respectively, compared to AD-
Light. The significant improvement in mean waiting time relative to travel time and speed can be attributed to the RL
optimization target being primarily focused on reducing waiting times at intersections, whereas travel time and speed
are influenced by overall traffic density. This prioritization results in a more substantial reduction in waiting times.
Furthermore, when compared to SARL-TSC, which utilizes temporal sequence data, iLLM-TSC shows a minor deficit
in overall vehicle throughput strategy. This difference arises because SARL-TSC focuses solely on maximizing junc-
tion efficiency, neglecting the prioritization of emergency vehicles. In contrast, iLLM-TSC reduces the waiting time
for emergency vehicles by 62.9% compared to SARL-TSC, benefiting from the integration of LLM capabilities that
enhance scene understanding and enable human-like reasoning during incidents.
Compared to EMVLight, a method specifically addressing emergency vehicle prioritization, iLLM-TSC has a slightly
longer average waiting time for emergency vehicles by 13.0%. However, EMVLight faces challenges in optimally
balancing reward weights for normal vehicles and emergency vehicles during training, which compromises its vehicle
control strategy for normal traffic conditions, leading to a 19.4% increase in average waiting time for all vehicles
compared to iLLM-TSC. Overall, iLLM-TSC not only facilitates quicker passage for emergency vehicles but also
maintains efficient average waiting times for general traffic. The addition of an LLM provides the system with en-
hanced adaptability and the capability to manage unexpected situations effectively.
Under degraded communication scenarios, all RL models that rely on observations experience a decline in perfor-
mance, with the exception of the traditional Fixed Time control method. For instance, when compared with the
ADLight model, our iLLM-TSC framework achieves a 17.5% improvement in mean waiting time. Furthermore,
SARL-TSC, which performs optimally under normal conditions, exhibits a 10% increase in mean waiting time com-
pared to iLLM-TSC in scenarios with compromised communication. While the Fixed Time control method remains
unaffected by communication quality degradation, its mean waiting time is 25% higher than that observed with iLLM-
TSC. This disparity is due to iLLM-TSC’s ability to compensate for information loss. Specifically, when data is
missing or incomplete, the LLM component of iLLM-TSC detects issues in the current scenario and disregards the
RL suggestions, instead applying common sense and any relevant information to reach a decision. Further details and
examples of this process will be provided in Section 5.6.
Additionally, iLLM-TSC significantly enhances emergency vehicles response efficiency in degraded communication
scenarios. Compared to EMVLight, iLLM-TSC improves the mean waiting time for emergency vehicles by 35%, and
also shows better performance in terms of mean speed and travel time. These results demonstrate that iLLM-TSC’s
strategy of utilizing RL for decision-making under normal conditions and leveraging LLM capabilities under special
circumstances effectively enhances system performance across various scenarios.
Table 2: Ablation experiments on the levels of detail in the prompt
Role
Hints
Scenario Description
Logic
Format
Level 1
✓
✓
✓
Level 2
✓
✓
✓
✓
Level 3
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
5.5
Prompt Ablation Experiments
To investigate the influence of prompt components on the performance of LLMs, we conducted a series of ablation
experiments based on the prompt structure depicted in Fig. 4. The prompt is composed of five elements: (1) the role of
the LLM (role), (2) essential hints for decision-making (hints), (3) description of the traffic scenario (traffic scenario),
(4) logical reasoning chain (logic), and (5) the format of the answer (format). Given the necessity for the LLM to
comprehend the environment and respond in a specific format, the role, traffic scenario description, and answer format
11
iLLM-TSC
A PREPRINT
(a)
(b)
Figure 5: Comparison of the relative performance of different LLMs Using different level prompts. (a) Normal
Vehicles. (b) Emergency Vehicles.
are considered fundamental components. Consequently, our experiments focused on evaluating the impact of the hints
and logic elements. The specific experimental conditions are detailed in Table 2. To assess the effects of varying
prompts on different LLMs, we employed both GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models. We introduced the mean waiting time
ratio as the performance metric, defined as the ratio of the mean waiting time under each experimental condition to
that obtained using the base level (Level 1) prompt with GPT-3.5 in the same traffic scenario. The experimental results
are illustrated in Fig. 5.
As depicted in Fig. 5(a), both GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models exhibit optimal performance with the Level 3 prompt
configuration. The transition from Level 1 to Level 2 prompts results in approximately a 20% improvement for GPT-
3.5 and a 15% improvement for GPT-4 in performance, highlighting the beneficial role of adding logical reasoning
components to the prompts. Further enhancement of about 5% is observed when progressing from Level 2 to Level 3,
highlighting the significance of providing hints for LLM decision-making. Additionally, comparisons between the two
models show that GPT-4 outperforms GPT-3.5 when using the same prompt, suggesting that advancements in LLM
technology also play a crucial role in decision-making effectiveness. Moreover, for emergency vehicle scenarios, as
shown in Fig. 5(b), employing a Level 3 prompt with GPT-3.5 results in a significant improvement of about 64%
compared to the Level 1 prompt. This indicates that a well-structured prompt, incorporating logical reasoning and
hints, substantially aids the LLM in making more effective decisions in complex traffic management scenarios.
12
iLLM-TSC
A PREPRINT
Level 1 
Decision:  reasonable,
Expalanations : "The RL Agent's decision to take Action 1 is reasonable given the current state. Action 1 
corresponds to 'Phase 1' which includes movements 'E0_l' and 'E1_l'  ...   Although there is an emergency 
vehicle at 'E3_s', this movement is not included in 'Phase 1' . However, since there is an information loss at 
'E0_s', it is difficult to accurately assess the situation. Therefore, it would be beneficial to monitor the 
situation closely and adjust the action if necessary ... 
Final action:  1
Level 2
Decision:  reasonable,
Expalanations:  The RL Agent's Action 1 corresponds to Phase 1, which allows movements 'E0_l' and 'E1_l'. 
Given the high number of cars (92) waiting in the 'E1--l' movement, prioritizing this phase is essential to 
alleviate significant congestion.  Although there is an emergency vehicle in 'E3--s', we must ensure maximum 
traffic efficiency. Action 1 will effectively reduce the backlog of vehicles waiting to turn left from 'E1--l' and 
also address the vehicles waiting in 'E0--l' ....
Final action:  1
Level 3
Decision:  unreasonable,
Expalanations:  ... The highest vehicle occupancy is in the 'E1_l' movement, which is indeed covered by 
Phase 1. However, there is an emergency vehicle in the 'E3_s' movement, which is covered by Phase 2. 
According to the rules, emergency vehicles have priority through intersections. Therefore, it would be more 
reasonable to take Action 2 (Phase 2) to allow the emergency vehicle to pass through the intersection as 
quickly as possible ....
Final action:  2
Observation 
The decision RL Agent make thie step is `Action：1`. 
The vehicles mean occupancy of each movement is: E1_s : 12.3% ... 
The number of cars waiting in each movement is: E1_s: 3 ...
Now these movements exist emergency vehicles ...
E3
E0
E2
E1
Phase-0
Phase-1
Phase-2
Phase-3
Figure 6: Comparison of LLM Outputs for Level 1, Level 2, and Level 3 Prompts in a Normal Traffic Scenario with
an Emergency Vehicle.
To further understand the influence of various prompt components on the performance of the LLM, we conducted ex-
periments using three different levels of prompts. These experiments were carried out under normal traffic conditions,
which also included the presence of emergency vehicles, using the GPT-4 model. The outcomes of these experiments
are illustrated in Fig. 6. The figure’s first row displays the current traffic scenario and the corresponding observations,
followed by the results for each prompt level.
Using Level 1 prompts often led to errors and outputs that were logically inconsistent. Specifically, although the LLM
recognized the presence of an emergency vehicle at E3 s, it failed to accurately identify the traffic phase where the
emergency vehicle was located and the congestion levels at each phase. Consequently, it was unable to prioritize
the emergency vehicle. With Level 2 prompts, which included a logical chain of reasoning, the LLM demonstrated
improved decision-making by acknowledging the presence of emergency vehicles. However, the model tended to
prioritize the flow of the highest number of vehicles, aiming to enhance traffic efficiency. This approach does not align
with real-world traffic management practices, where emergency vehicles should be given precedence. At Level 3, the
LLM provided more accurate explanations and correctly prioritized the passage of the emergency vehicle, adhering to
established traffic rules. This level clearly shows the importance of including comprehensive details in the prompts to
guide the LLM in making decisions that conform to real-world traffic management protocols.
Continuously refining prompt details allows us to better constrain the output of LLM agents, leveraging their capa-
bilities to provide decisions and explanations more closely aligned with human cognition. This facilitates improved
collaboration with LLM and RL agents in tasks such as TSC.
5.6
Typical Case Studies
In this section, we analyze how RL and LLMs collaborate in decision-making through three cases.
13
iLLM-TSC
A PREPRINT
Observation
Initial Action
E0-s has 
more vehicles
E0
E3
E2
E1-l has some 
waiting vehicles 
E1
iLLM-TSC (Normal Scenario)
Observation:
The step time is:"189"
The decision RL Agent make thie step is `Action：1`.
The vehicles mean occupancy of each movement is:`{'E0_s': '29.6%', 
'E1_s': '7.9%', 'E0_l': '3.4%', 'E1_l': '28.0%', 'E2_s': '0.0%', 'E3_s': '7.2%', 
'E3_l': '10.5%', 'E2_l': '0.0%'}`. 
The number of cars waiting in each movement is：`{'E0_s': 0, 'E1_s': 
3, 'E1_l': 0, 'E0_l': 7, 'E3_s': 0, 'E2_s': 0, 'E3_l': 0, 'E2_l': 0}`. 
[...]
Phase-0
Phase-1
Phase-2
Phase-3
Expalanation
Final Action
E0
E3
E1
E2
Choose 
Phase 1
"final_action": "1"
"decision": "reasonable",
"expalanations": "The RL agent's decision to take Action 1 is
reasonable. Action 1 corresponds to Phase 1, which controls the movements
'E0_l' and 'E1_l'. The occupancy rates for these movements are 3.5% and
28% respectively, and the number of waiting cars are 0 and 16 respectively.
This indicates a significant amount of traffic in the 'E1_l' movement, which
justifies the decision to take Action 1. Furthermore, there are no emergency
vehicles present in the intersection, so there is no need to prioritize other
movements. Therefore, the RL agent's decision is reasonable and should
help to alleviate traffic congestion in the 'E1_l' movement."
Decision:
Final Action:
Phase-0
Phase-1
Phase-2
Phase-3
Figure 7: Case 1: Normal Scenario. LLM confirms no special events; RL decision aimed at minimizing intersection
wait times is endorsed and implemented.
Expalanation
Final Action
EMV Vehicle
Through
E0
E3
E1
E2
Final Action:
"final_action": "2"
Decision:
"decision" : "unreasonable",
“expalanations”: “The RL Agent‘s decision is to stay in Phase 0 (Action
0), which controls the movements 'E0_s' and 'E1_s'. However, the occupancy
rates for these movements are relatively low (9.33% and 3.5% respectively)
and the number of waiting cars is also low (7 and 3 respectively). On the
other hand, the 'E1_l' movement has a high occupancy rate (10.5%) and a
high number of waiting cars (16). Moreover, there is an emergency vehicle
in the 'E3_s' movement, which should be given priority. Therefore, it would
be more reasonable to switch to Phase 2 (Action 2), which controls the '-
E3_s' movement, to allow the emergency vehicle to pass, and then to Phase 1
(Action 1), which controls the '-E1_l' movement, to reduce congestion."
Observation
Initial Action
E0
E3
E1
E2
EMV 
Vehicle
Waiting
Vehicles
iLLM-TSC (Emergency Vehicles Scenario)
Observation:
The step time is:"72"
The decision RL Agent make thie step is `Action：0`.
The vehicles mean occupancy of each movement is:`{'E0_s': '9.3%', 
'E1_s': '3.5%', 'E0_l': '0.0%', 'E1_l': '10.5%', 'E2_s': '0.0%', 'E3_s': '5.2%', 
'E3_l': '0.0%', 'E2_l': '0.0%'}`.
The number of cars waiting in each movement is：`{'E0_s': 7, 'E1_s': 
3, 'E0_l': 0, 'E1_l': 16, 'E2_s': 0, 'E3_s': 7, 'E3_l': 0, 'E2_l': 0}`.  
Now these movements exist emergency vehicles：`['E3_s']`. 
[...]
Phase-0
Phase-1
Phase-2
Phase-3
Phase-0
Phase-1
Phase-2
Phase-3
Figure 8: Case 2: Normal Scenario with Emergency Vehicles. The LLM adjusts the RL decision to prioritize the
emergency vehicle at the intersection.
14
iLLM-TSC
A PREPRINT
Observation
Initial Action
x
E0
E3
E1
E2
E0-s information loss
RL Agent
Chose  Phase 1
iLLM-TSC (Degraded Communication Scenario)
The decision RLAgent make thie step is: `Action：1`.
The vehicles mean occupancy of each movement is:`{'E0_s': ‘-1', 'E1_s':
‘5.2%', 'E1_l': ’17.5%', 'E0_l': ‘6.9%', 'E3_s': ‘24.7%', 'E2_s': '0.0%', 'E3_l':
‘3.9%', 'E2_l': ‘0.0%'}`.
The number of cars waiting in each movement is：`{'E0_s’: -1, 'E1_s’:
0, 'E1_l’: 45, 'E0_l’: 7, 'E3_s’: 21, 'E2_s': 0, 'E3_l': 0, 'E2_l‘: 0}`.
Phase to Movement: '{'Phase 0': ['E0_s', 'E1_s'], 'Phase 1': ['E0_l',
'E1_l'], 'Phase 2': ['E3_s', 'E2_s'], 'Phase 3': ['E3_l', 'E2_l']}’
Is there a information loss now：'True’
The loss ID is：' E0_s ‘
[...]
Observation:
Phase-0
Phase-1
Phase-2
Phase-3
Expalanation
Final Action
Choose
Phase 2
E0
E3
E1
E2
 Final Action:
"final_action" : ”2"
Decision:
"decision": "unreasonable",
"expalanations": " The RL agent's decision to take Action 1 (Phase 1) 
is not the most optimal in this situation. The highest vehicle occupancy is 
in the 'E3_s' movement with 24.69% and the 'E1_l' movement with 17.5%. 
However, Action 1 (Phase 1) only covers the 'E1_l' movement and not the 
'E3_s' movement. The 'E3_s' movement also has a high number of waiting
cars (21 cars). Therefore, it would be more beneficial to take Action 2 
(Phase 2) which covers the 'E3_s' movement and can help reduce the 
congestion in this lane. Furthermore, there is a loss of information in the 
‘E0_s' movement, which makes Action 1 (Phase 1) less reliable.."
Phase-0
Phase-1
Phase-2
Phase-3
Figure 9: Case 3: Degraded Communication Scenario. The LLM intervenes to correct the RL agent’s suboptimal
decision under degraded communication conditions.
5.6.1
Case 1: Normal Scenario
As depicted in Fig. 8, the first scenario represents a regular traffic condition at an intersection without any unusual or
long-tail scenarios or communication issues. In this scenario, the traffic phase selected by the RL agent allows some
vehicles to proceed, even though this phase might not correspond to the direction with the highest number of waiting
vehicles. The LLM, using its capability to understand and describe the scene, confirms the absence of any special
events currently affecting the traffic. At this point, the optimization goal of the LLM aligns with that of the RL agent.
Consequently, the LLM endorses and supports the RL agent’s decision, which contributes to alleviating congestion
at the intersection. This case demonstrates that iLLM-TSC does not merely prioritize the green light for the longest
queue but instead supports the RL decision and applies reasoning akin to human common sense, a capability often
lacking in traditional rule-based algorithms.
5.6.2
Case 2: Normal Scenario with Emergency Vehicles
RL agents can sometimes fail to make optimal decisions in rare or unexpected situations, particularly when such
scenarios are not included in the design of the reward function. Our approach, iLLM-TSC, which integrates a LLM
with RL, addresses this limitation effectively. Fig. 8 illustrates a scenario where an emergency vehicle approaches
an intersection. The RL component of iLLM-TSC initially selects Phase 0, prioritizing lanes with higher vehicle ac-
cumulation, as the training did not specifically account for emergency vehicles. Recognizing the need to prioritize
emergency responses, the LLM intervenes to override this decision by activating Phase 2. This action holds back
other vehicles, thereby allowing the emergency vehicle to pass through the intersection promptly. This case study
demonstrates that iLLM-TSC not only aims to minimize average waiting times but also effectively manages excep-
tional traffic situations. Such adaptability is crucial in real-world traffic management, where diverse and unpredictable
scenarios often arise.
5.6.3
Case 3: Degraded Communication Scenarios
Communication disruptions can severely impact the performance of RL agents, particularly when the real-time data
deviates from the training conditions. Fig. 9 depicts a situation characterized by communication problems, specifically
packet loss, which prevents the accurate assessment of queue lengths at edge E0. Consequently, the RL agent defaults
to activating Phase 0, which governs the movements E0 l and E1 l. These lanes exhibit relatively low occupancy
15
iLLM-TSC
A PREPRINT
rates of 6.9% and 17.5%, respectively. However, the LLM detects an anomaly in the reported congestion level, which
is erroneously noted as −1, signaling a loss of critical information. Upon analyzing the current traffic conditions, the
LLM identifies significant congestion in the E3 s movement, with 21 waiting vehicles. To alleviate this, the LLM
recommends switching to Phase 2, which prioritizes the E3 s movement, thereby effectively addressing the congestion
in this lane. Additionally, the unreliable data from the E0 s movement makes Phase 1 a less dependable option due to
the information loss. This case illustrates how iLLM-TSC can adapt to communication faults by leveraging the LLM’s
capability to interpret incomplete data and make informed decisions to optimize traffic flow.
6
Conclusion
In this study, we introduce the iLLM-TSC framework aimed at enhancing the reliability of RL-based TSC systems in
real-world scenarios. Specifically, this paper addresses the challenge of imperfect observations due to degraded com-
munication scenarios and rare traffic conditions not considered by the reward function with our dual-step framework.
By leveraging the generalization capabilities of LLMs and making preliminary judgments about RL agent actions, our
method enhances the adaptability of TSC systems to handle the complexities of real-world situations. This dual-step
decision-making process enables our method to effectively manage complex environments while maintaining the ro-
bust performance characteristics of RL methods. Additionally, iLLM-TSC can be seamlessly integrated with existing
RL-based TSC systems. Extensive experiments and tests validate the effectiveness of the proposed iLLM-TSC frame-
work. In scenarios with degraded communication, iLLM-TSC reduces the average waiting time by 17.5% compared
to traditional RL methods. This significant improvement underscores the enhanced scene comprehension capabilities
of LLMs tailored specifically for TSC applications. It is important to note that this initial work only scratches the
surface of the potential integration of LLM-assisted frameworks with RL and is expected to inspire further exploration
of the synergy between LLM and RL.
References
[1] W. Yue, C. Li, Y. Chen, P. Duan, and G. Mao, “What is the root cause of congestion in urban traffic networks:
Road infrastructure or signal control?,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 23, no. 7,
pp. 8662–8679, 2021.
[2] P. Koonce and L. Rodegerdts, “Traffic signal timing manual.,” tech. rep., United States. Federal Highway Ad-
ministration, 2008.
[3] P. Lowrie, “Scats-a traffic responsive method of controlling urban traffic,” Sales information brochure published
by Roads & Traffic Authority, Sydney, Australia, 1990.
[4] N. Nigam, D. P. Singh, and J. Choudhary, “A review of different components of the intelligent traffic management
system (itms),” Symmetry, vol. 15, no. 3, p. 583, 2023.
[5] M. Noaeen, A. Naik, L. Goodman, J. Crebo, T. Abrar, Z. S. H. Abad, A. L. Bazzan, and B. Far, “Reinforcement
learning in urban network traffic signal control: A systematic literature review,” Expert Systems with Applica-
tions, vol. 199, p. 116830, 2022.
[6] G. Dulac-Arnold, N. Levine, D. J. Mankowitz, J. Li, C. Paduraru, S. Gowal, and T. Hester, “Challenges of
real-world reinforcement learning: definitions, benchmarks and analysis,” Machine Learning, vol. 110, no. 9,
pp. 2419–2468, 2021.
[7] M. Chen, Y. Bai, H. V. Poor, and M. Wang, “Efficient rl with impaired observability: Learning to act with delayed
and missing state observations,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, 2024.
[8] A. Pang, Z. Xu, M. Wang, M.-O. Pun, and Y. Kan, “Reinforcement learning-based traffic signal control using
delayed observations for v2x,” in ICC 2023 - IEEE International Conference on Communications, pp. 4020–
4025, 2023.
[9] H. Su, Y. D. Zhong, J. Y. Chow, B. Dey, and L. Jin, “Emvlight: A multi-agent reinforcement learning framework
for an emergency vehicle decentralized routing and traffic signal control system,” Transportation Research Part
C: Emerging Technologies, vol. 146, p. 103955, 2023.
[10] D. Fu, X. Li, L. Wen, M. Dou, P. Cai, B. Shi, and Y. Qiao, “Drive like a human: Rethinking autonomous driving
with large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07162, 2023.
[11] L. Da, K. Liou, T. Chen, X. Zhou, X. Luo, Y. Yang, and H. Wei, “Open-ti: Open traffic intelligence with
augmented language model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00211, 2023.
16
iLLM-TSC
A PREPRINT
[12] M. Wang, A. Pang, Y. Kan, M.-O. Pun, C. S. Chen, and B. Huang, “LLM-Assisted Light: Leveraging large
language model capabilities for human-mimetic traffic signal control in complex urban environments,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.08337, 2024.
[13] T. Wu, L. Luo, Y.-F. Li, S. Pan, T.-T. Vu, and G. Haffari, “Continual learning for large language models: A
survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01364, 2024.
[14] S.-B. Cools, C. Gershenson, and B. D’Hooghe, “Self-organizing traffic lights: A realistic simulation,” Advances
in applied self-organizing systems, pp. 45–55, 2013.
[15] C. Wu, I. Kim, and Z. Ma, “Deep reinforcement learning based traffic signal control: A comparative analysis,”
Procedia Computer Science, vol. 220, pp. 275–282, 2023.
[16] A. Pang, M. Wang, Y. Chen, M.-O. Pun, and M. Lepech, “Scalable reinforcement learning framework for traffic
signal control under communication delays,” IEEE Open Journal of Vehicular Technology, 2024.
[17] M. Wang, X. Xiong, Y. Kan, C. Xu, and M.-O. Pun, “UniTSA: A universal reinforcement learning framework
for v2x traffic signal control,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, pp. 1–16, 2024.
[18] M. Wang, Y. Xu, X. Xiong, Y. Kan, C. Xu, and M.-O. Pun, “ADLight: A universal approach of traffic signal
control with augmented data using reinforcement learning,” in Transportation Research Board (TRB) 102nd
Annual Meeting, 2023.
[19] A. Pang, Z. Xu, M. Wang, M.-O. Pun, and Y. Kan, “Reinforcement learning-based traffic signal control using
delayed observations for v2x,” in ICC 2023-IEEE International Conference on Communications, pp. 4020–4025,
IEEE, 2023.
[20] A. Oroojlooy, M. Nazari, D. Hajinezhad, and J. Silva, “Attendlight: Universal attention-based reinforcement
learning model for traffic signal control,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 4079–
4090, 2020.
[21] H. Wei, G. Zheng, H. Yao, and Z. Li, “Intellilight: A reinforcement learning approach for intelligent traffic light
control,” in Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data
mining, pp. 2496–2505, 2018.
[22] M. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Kan, C. Xu, L. Michael, M.-O. Pun, and X. Xiong, “Traffic signal cycle control with cen-
tralized critic and decentralized actors under varying intervention frequencies,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08248,
2024.
[23] B. K˝ov´ari, B. Pelenczei, S. Aradi, and T. B´ecsi, “Reward design for intelligent intersection control to reduce
emission,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 39691–39699, 2022.
[24] L. Wang, C. Ma, X. Feng, Z. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Tang, X. Chen, Y. Lin, et al., “A survey on
large language model based autonomous agents,” Frontiers of Computer Science, vol. 18, no. 6, p. 186345, 2024.
[25] S. Lai, Z. Xu, W. Zhang, H. Liu, and H. Xiong, “Large language models as traffic signal control agents: Capacity
and opportunity,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.16044, 2023.
[26] J. Mao, Y. Qian, H. Zhao, and Y. Wang, “Gpt-driver:
Learning to drive with gpt,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.01415, 2023.
[27] C. Sima, K. Renz, K. Chitta, L. Chen, H. Zhang, C. Xie, P. Luo, A. Geiger, and H. Li, “Drivelm: Driving with
graph visual question answering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14150, 2023.
[28] T. Webb, S. S. Mondal, C. Wang, B. Krabach, and I. Momennejad, “A prefrontal cortex-inspired architecture for
planning in large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.00194, 2023.
[29] Y. Cao, H. Zhao, Y. Cheng, T. Shu, G. Liu, G. Liang, J. Zhao, and Y. Li, “Survey on large language model-
enhanced reinforcement learning: Concept, taxonomy, and methods,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00282, 2024.
[30] J. Lin, Y. Du, O. Watkins, D. Hafner, P. Abbeel, D. Klein, and A. Dragan, “Learning to model the world with
language,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01399, 2023.
[31] H. Li, X. Yang, Z. Wang, X. Zhu, J. Zhou, Y. Qiao, X. Wang, H. Li, L. Lu, and J. Dai, “Auto mc-reward:
Automated dense reward design with large language models for minecraft,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09238,
2023.
[32] S. Chakraborty, K. Weerakoon, P. Poddar, P. Tokekar, A. S. Bedi, and D. Manocha, “Re-move: An adaptive policy
design approach for dynamic environments via language-based feedback,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07622,
2023.
[33] Y. J. Ma, W. Liang, G. Wang, D.-A. Huang, O. Bastani, D. Jayaraman, Y. Zhu, L. Fan, and A. Anandkumar,
“Eureka: Human-level reward design via coding large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12931, 2023.
17
iLLM-TSC
A PREPRINT
[34] R. Shi, Y. Liu, Y. Ze, S. S. Du, and H. Xu, “Unleashing the power of pre-trained language models for offline
reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.20587, 2023.
[35] P. Mondorf and B. Plank, “Beyond accuracy: Evaluating the reasoning behavior of large language models–a
survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01869, 2024.
[36] G. Marvin, N. Hellen, D. Jjingo, and J. Nakatumba-Nabende, “Prompt engineering in large language models,” in
International Conference on Data Intelligence and Cognitive Informatics, pp. 387–402, Springer, 2023.
[37] J. Cheng, X. Liu, K. Zheng, P. Ke, H. Wang, Y. Dong, J. Tang, and M. Huang, “Black-box prompt optimization:
Aligning large language models without model training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04155, 2023.
[38] P. Sahoo, A. K. Singh, S. Saha, V. Jain, S. Mondal, and A. Chadha, “A systematic survey of prompt engineering
in large language models: Techniques and applications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07927, 2024.
[39] J. White, Q. Fu, S. Hays, M. Sandborn, C. Olea, H. Gilbert, A. Elnashar, J. Spencer-Smith, and D. C. Schmidt,
“A prompt pattern catalog to enhance prompt engineering with chatgpt,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11382, 2023.
[40] S. K. K. Santu and D. Feng, “Teler: A general taxonomy of llm prompts for benchmarking complex tasks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.11430, 2023.
[41] L. Giray, “Prompt engineering with chatgpt: a guide for academic writers,” Annals of biomedical engineering,
vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 2629–2633, 2023.
[42] S. Yao, D. Yu, J. Zhao, I. Shafran, T. Griffiths, Y. Cao, and K. Narasimhan, “Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem
solving with large language models,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, 2024.
[43] Y. Gao, Y. Xiong, X. Gao, K. Jia, J. Pan, Y. Bi, Y. Dai, J. Sun, and H. Wang, “Retrieval-augmented generation
for large language models: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997, 2023.
[44] K.-F. Chu, A. Y. Lam, and V. O. Li, “Traffic signal control using end-to-end off-policy deep reinforcement
learning,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 7184–7195, 2021.
[45] I. Bocharova, B. Kudryashov, M. Rabi, N. Lyamin, W. Dankers, E. Frick, and A. Vinel, “Characterizing packet
losses in vehicular networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 9, pp. 8347–8358, 2019.
[46] V. Mannoni, V. Berg, S. Sesia, and E. Perraud, “A comparison of the v2x communication systems: Its-g5 and
c-v2x,” in 2019 IEEE 89th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2019-Spring), pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2019.
[47] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
18
